This video is brought to you by brilliant knock something off your
holiday to-do list.
Right now gifts give someone the gift of learning with brilliant go to brilliant
org slash biographics and gift a premium subscription
In the year D eight,
a D ne committed suicide ending not only his reign as emperor of Rome,
but the reign of the ju Claude day and dynasty unsurprisingly,
this plunged Rome into chaos as multiple factions,
trying to fill the power vacuum created by the fall of Nero.
Following this came a crisis known as the year of the fall emperors,
which as you might guess,
or four different men seize the throne in the span of less than a year.
Once the dust had settled and the turmoil had ended.
Rome had a new emperor Sian who started his own Flavian dynasty.
Sian was instrumental in bringing some much needed stability back to the Rome
and em empire.
His reign was mostly peaceful and focus on restoring Rome's infrastructure and
economy.
He also undertook ambitious building projects as parts of the city were still in
shambles following the great fire of 64 ad during Nero's time.
Some of his more notable building projects included the temple of peace.
And of course the FLA and ahea,
which became the most iconic landmark of the Roman bar that are known today as
the Coliseum.
In the lives of the Caesars ancient historian.
Suton provided us with information regarding veian early years,
according to him, the future, em,
embryo was born Titus FLAS Vespasian on November the 17th nine
ad in the Edna region of Italy in a village called fall Cranney whose exact
whereabouts are unknown today by all accounts, Sian came from humble beginnings.
Suetonius describes the Flavian house as obscure and without family portraits.
Yet one that the country has no reason to be a,
the first flan of note was veian paternal grandfather,
Titus FLAS Petro who fought as a Centurian for Pompe.
The battle of falis against Julius Caesar. After his side, lost the war,
Petro obtained a full pardon and became a tax collector.
His son Sabinas followed in his father's footsteps and became something.
No one would think possible.
A beloved tax collector suton says that there were cities in Asia,
which erected statues in his honor with the inscription to an honest tax
gatherer, Sabina, married Vasia poll, and their two children together.
Sabinas the younger and Vasia Vasia actually came from a more prominent family.
As her father was a military tree. Her brother was a Senator.
Therefore her sons had an easier time rising up the racks for a long time.
It seems that older brother Sabinas would be the one destined for great things.
He was ambitious from an early age and eventually became pre fact of Rome.
PAC on the other hands did not show much interest in politics and only joined
due to his mother's constant torts that otherwise he would become his brother's
footman. In subsequent years, SPAC married, Flavia DOMA,
till who Bo him two sons and a daughter, Titus Domitian and Dilla.
The younger while both sons would eventually reign his Rome,
em Fe's wife and daughter passed away before he ascended to the throne
In order to become a trait Sian first had to serve in the military.
And as a minor magistrate,
he started off as a Tribune of the soldiers assigned to race.
During the reign Claudia Vespasian was appointed legate thanks to the influence
of narcissists.
This is not the mythological hunter who fell in love with his own reflection,
but rather a freed man who was part of the Imperial court Vasan was given
command of his own Legion. Legio second or Augusta and stationed in Germany.
This promotion was a double edge sword though,
while Sian climbed up the social ranks,
he also became an enemy of Aina Claudia's wife who hated narcissists
and all of his friends, Sian was first made console. Then governor of Africa,
ProCon Laris re province on the Northern coast of Africa,
the quality of his governorship is up for some debate,
although he did not go into de details,
Tacitus described it as notorious and hated in his histories.
And he compared it unfavorably to that of his predecessor vitals,
who was honest and populars. However,
said the VPAC in governed with great justice and high honor,
although even he specified that the governor once said to deal with a riot where
people pelted him with turnips.
There was one odd thing about PAC's governorship though.
It almost bankrupted him.
Normally governors used their positions to make as much money as possible
through extortion or receiving bribes.
It was almost expected of them as the governorship served as a reward,
typically given either to friends of the Amper or acts consoles who fought well
in military campaigns, but AIAN, however,
chose to secure friendships and favors over money.
And at one point he found himself almost broke.
Suetonius wrote that he was forced to mortgage all of his estates to his brother
and took up the mule trade to win back. Some of his fortune,
thus ending the nickname.
The mule tear Sian career is a civil servants ended somewhat ignominiously
after Claudia came narrow.
And although the space was originally part of his rat,
he quickly lost the emperors favor.
He greatly offended Nero by repeatedly falling asleep or walking out during
his musical performances.
Besian was eventually kicked out of the emperors in a circle,
ands began avoiding all public appearances altogether fearing the ne rose
wrath might go further than simply banishing him from his Imperial court
As a military man Vasia distinguished himself in two major campaigns. First,
he took part in the Roman invasion of Britain in 43 ad under general Les
plot. At this time,
the space was still a legate in commands of the Legio Augusta.
His brother Sabina was also part of the invading force, although his exact rank,
his somewhat uncertain during this campaign,
ston said that Vespasian engaged in 30 battles and subdued two powerful tribes.
He captured over 20 towns and also conquered the island AVEs known today as the
island of white for success. He was awarded a Roman triumph back home in Romans.
Eventually his console ship Sian played an even more instrumental role in his
second military campaign.
When he was tasked with putting down the great revolt Roman province of Judea
and what would become the first Jewish Roman war. It started in 66 80.
The people of Judea were angry over taxes exacerbated by increasing tensions
between the Roman and Jewish population in man ill advised attempts to exert his
dominance. The Roman governor gays,
Floris decided to plunderer the second temple on the temple mounds in Jerusalem,
as well as order raids on Jews throughout the city.
This said the opposite of fact and proved to be the spark that triggered a large
scale rebellion. The leg age of the nearby province of Syria Seus.
GARS assembled his army and marched on Judea to que the rebellion. He however,
suffered a shocking defeat and died in 67,
a D ne of the mission of ending the great revolt to veian.
This was two decades after his incursions into Britain. By this point,
his oldest son ti had also joined the ranks of the military and bolstered his
father's forces with reinforcements from Alexandria,
serving as his second in command,
not sharing his predecessors hubris Vespasian did not want to simply rush in
Nick expecting victory.
He avoided a direct attack on Jerusalem since the city was reinforced and
contained the main rebel army.
Instead he first invaded Galilee with a strong army of over 60,000 soldiers
and auxiliaries. First paent had little trouble conquering the region.
As many towns gave up without a fight.
A particular note is the sea of yacht fat or jota patter that took
place in the summer of 67, a D the Romans took the city after 47 days.
The leader of the Jewish forces was yo Ben,
Matt Yahu who became better known as Jaus one of the most important Jewish
historians of the era.
The Basian kept Jaus in his re as a slave slash interpreter eventually
granting him his freedom and Roman citizenship. When he became emperor.
Joyce wrote the war of the Jews,
a Chronicle of the revolt that gave detailed accounts of several battles.
According to him, PAC initially wanted to send him to narrow after the siege,
but Josephus persuaded the general to keep him for himself by convincing the
Roman that divine prophecy ordained that Sian will become emperor of Romes
also made reference to this prognostication and also mentioned multiple other
omens, which allegedly showed that Sian would one day rule Rome.
Speaking of which that exact opportunity presented itself in 69 80,
the Jewish war was not over yet,
but Sian had seize the moment he left his son in charge of the troops in Juda,
Titus favored a more direct approach and decided to lay siege on the city of
Jerusalem.
Titus was aided by the same people he was trying to defeat that was inviting
between the leaders of the rev or forces known as the zealots, two of them,
John of Gahar and Simon Bargo vibe for control and splinter their faction
from within it took over four months,
but TIS managed to break down the walls of Jerusalem and storm the city almost
burning it completely to the ground. Now,
just before we get into the bit about how PAC becomes Emper,
I want to tell you about today's fantastic sponsor brilliance.
So it's the holidays. We're all busy plans to arrange gifts,
to give it's a little bit last minute now, probably places to go as well.
But with today's sponsor brilliance, you can give the gift of learning.
I bet there is someone you know, who enjoys learning as much as you do,
and a subscription to brilliant could make a perfect gift for them.
You've heard me talk about brilliance on this channel before by now,
maybe even have a membership yourself, brilliant, teach you all about math,
science, and computer science. But beyond that,
they also teach you problem solving skills, which are practical.
Even if you don't pursue the sciences,
learning how to break down complex problems into their component.
Parts is just pretty critical in any career path you choose. But look really,
it's just a great way to take what you learn on this channel.
Just a step further, or in this case,
gift a premium subscription to someone else so they can take their knowledge
further. And what better gift is there than that?
So do that right now at brilliant org slash biographics or use the link below,
uh, let's get back to it
In order to get a good picture of IANS Ascension to the throne and the impact it
had on Roman history.
We must understand the turbulent times that came before it,
that threatened to bring down the empire itself in the year 65 80,
the PI Inan conspiracy attempted to get rid of narrow and restore the Roman
Republic. It failed and resulted in dozens of executions, suicides,
and exiles as near Rore increasingly paranoid about the people around him.
A couple of years later,
governor GAAS Julius index from Goul rebelled against Nero and marched with an
army to depose the emperor and replace him with another governor named a,
he also failed,
but support for Nero was an all time low from the army and the nobleman.
Although he remained popular with the people in 68,
the Pretorian guard was persuaded by preve and amphibious subpoenas to abandon
Nero and switch its allegiance to Garba.
Nero was tried in Ceia and condemned to death as a public enemy.
When word reach de emperor,
he decided it would be better if he died by his own hands.
So neuro committed suicide, thus ending the first Imperial dynasty of Rome,
Tom oil erupted immediately as amphibious had a change of heart.
And instead of supporting GABA, he wanted the throne for himself.
As it turned out, he wasn't nearly as popular as he thought he was.
The soldiers were reluctant to portray Garba and after an inspiring speech by
military Tribune and Tous AARA,
they unequivocally rejected amph video's plan and cut him down with their swords
and then dragged his body through the city.
GABA didn't stay in everyone's good graces long though,
he became em in June 68 ad in January of the following year,
he had already lost the support of the soldiers and the nobleman.
This was mostly because he didn't reward those loyal to him and he failed to
keep promises made by him more an amphibious on his behalf.
Moreover GABA also canceled all of the reforms of Nero and adopted a young
nobleman named Lucius per PSO,
as his successor of offending, other more prominent statesmen,
who felt like they deserved that honor among these statesman was Marcus Salus
author.
He had the influence to sway the Senate to his son and the money to bribe the
Pretorian God on January the 15th, the God assassinated Garba PSO,
and a few close associates and placed their heads on Spears and brought them to
Aho who became the new Emper according to plea tar,
although only a few Pretorian were involved in the killings, hundreds,
others piled the bodies on the ground and smeared their hands and swords with
their blood.
As a show of loyalty to Arthur author's reign lasted a whopping three months at
the same time that he made a claims of the Thrones.
So did another man named Fatus. However, the latter was in Germany at the time.
So it took him longer to gather his forces and March on Rome.
Fatus had been put in charge of the Roman army and the province of Germania
inferior, and he quickly injured himself to his soldiers. In fact,
he was so popular that his troops refused to swear allegiance to Gar and instead
proclaimed fat para. By the time his forces actually reached Italy,
GABA was dead and a was the new ruler. The two met at the battle OFR come on,
April the 14th, 69 80,
which resulted in a decisive victory for vitals after his defeat author
committed suicide.
Tacito actually gives author quite a noble death saying that the emperor killed
himself to avoid plunging Rome and to civil war.
This historian writes that although delivered an impassioned speech saying that
his life was not worth so many of rooms, young men,
such Nobel armies to be again,
cut down and lost the state that all those funeral tacit mentions that some
soldiers followed their emperor's example and committed suicide near the PI.
And that the practice was repeated at other Miller tree camps.
Vitals became emperor on April the 16th, 69 ad. And so,
although he reigned until the end of the year,
he lost the support of his Countryman. Long before that,
he was also a decadent ruler who according to Casius D was addicted to luxury
and life. He gorged himself on rare, expensive foods,
holding banquets multiple times a day.
I regarded nearest T golden house or DOMA Suria as a wretched house that
was scantily equipped and he wanted something a bit more opulence,
unsurprisingly,
his Kell spending soon put great strain on Rome's economy and led to fatals
losing a lot of supporters. IANS rise to the throne, echoed that of fats.
He also won over the legions in charge during the war in Judea ran in July 69
ad. They acclaimed him as Emper moreover.
He also had the support of the nearby provinces of Syria and Egyptian before
long Sian had an army powerful enough to March on Rome.
The soldiers were placed under the command of general Gaia Luin Messian the
Syrian governor while Sian traveled to Egypt to secure the grain supply network
vital to Rome. Meanwhile,
even more allegiance from other provinces pledged their allegiance to PAC mostly
because they served under author and bought strong resentment fats.
These forces under the leadership of general Marcus cent PR did not even wait
for Mac's army to count sharpens advanced on Italy on their owns
suggested a different reason for their enthusiastic support of Sian.
They originally left in order to aid author,
and on the way did a fair bit of plunging and pillaging.
When they found out a had fallen,
they realized they would be punished severely unless they ended up on the
winning team. So they threw their backing behind Sian.
The troops met fats' forces at the seconds bat ofum on October the
24th, 69 ad and where victorious defeated fats wanted to abate,
but the Pretorian guard would not allow him to and instead made in retreat to
the palace in Rome,
back in the city Pretorian and civilians put up heavy resistance against AIAN
forces and the battle inside Rome caused many deaths and a lot of destruction.
Even the temple of Jupiter, optimist Maximus,
the oldest most important temple in Rome was destroyed in an act described by
Tacitus as the saddest and most shameful crime that the Roman eight had ever
suffered.
Persian's brother SBE was killed during the conflict and his youngest son to
median barely escaped with his life.
The show that Vitalis had lost complete control of his men,
Tacitus mentioned how the more brought Sabina before the emperor ands,
even though vitals wanted to show mercy,
the blood thirsty hoard ran through sus with swords cut off his head and dragged
his mutilated corpse through the streets.
A similar F phase eventually fell vitals as well. Inevitably,
the space forces gained control of the city and captured the emperor.
He was taken to a notorious place of execution known as the Germanian stairs and
struck down on December the 21st, the Senate proclaimed AIAN as the new emperor.
Although some regard July 1st date was declared Ember back in Egypt as the start
of his reign.
VAPA was still in Alexandria when he heard of the death of Tellus and that he
was now in charge of the Roman empire.
Therefore mus handled the administration of the empire assisted by Domitian the
two acted with complete authority.
And even mics adds an Imperial seal given to him by Visian so that
he may stamp official documents. At one point,
the Sian sent Domitian tongue in cheek message saying, I thank you,
my son for permitting me to hold office.
And that you have not yet Deron me after a year of strife.
Wared numerous expenditures. Macy's first concern was refilling Rome's Coff,
the enacted new taxes and brought back old ones, a strategy,
which was continued when the space in returned.
And doubtedly the most memorable money making scheme enacted by the emperor was
a urine tax in ancient Rome.
It was the commodity prized for its hi amonia content used in laundry and
tanning, and it was collected at public rhinos since year in was the basis for a
successful trade. It felt natural for Visian to tax it.
Some people found this practice incredibly distasteful, including his son,
Titus who protested the idea to his father.
According to sat fian picked up a coin and holding it to Titu.
His nose asked him if he found the smell offensive, he said no.
And as the emperor replied, yet, it comes from urine.
This is regarded as the origin for the Latin phrase, Puna,
non or money does not stink.
It is also the reason why in many French speaking parts of the world,
a public Urin is known as a Espi.
The space reign was aided by a heavy propaganda campaign.
He understood that starting a new dynasty,
especially after a period of great instability was a tough task.
And that many of his people still regarded him either as unproven or unworthy.
He greatly encouraged that spread of stories,
which mentioned prophecies and omens that he had been destined to become
emperor.
He made great use of writers and rewarded those who portrayed him in a positive
light while punishing those who did not the stoic philosophers were frequent
targets and were often arrested or had their works destroyed.
At one point at the insistence of mus Sian, expelled them from Romo together.
It should be noted that many ancient historians used as sources for VAPA, TAs,
Joseph, and SATs, who were contemporaries of his.
They wrote their accounts during the reigns of Sian or his sons,
and were all rewarded in one form or another Cass's Dio who wrote his work a
hundred years after the Flavian dynasty disappeared was more critical of Sian.
Although he didn't disparage him greatly,
either Dio was not afraid to mention some of his more repre hen act such as the
persecution of the Stoics or the execution of the families of certain enemies,
both he and Suetonius mentioned that Sian had been the target of multiple
conspiracies, although they failed,
they showed that the emperor was probably not as popular as he thought
VAPA reign was mostly peaceful with the exception of the Beav and rebellion,
which occurred at the beginning of his rule.
Several tribes banded together in Gaul and Germany and rose up against the Roman
em empire,
hoping to take advantage of the turmoil caused by NE's death and the year of the
four EMS. They were led by GA's Julius villas and Julius Sina.
The latter aim to be a descendant Julius Caesar and therefore the rifle letter,
the throne,
although the rebels initially gave the Roman army multiple humiliating defeats
Rome responded with a massive force led by Quinta Patels Sarius who crushed the
uprising in 78 deep Bastian's long legacy is that of a builder when he
ascended to the throne,
many parts of Rome were ravaged due to the great far not to mention the urban
battle between his soldiers and the supporters of Tellus.
He rebuilt the temple of Jupiter using the same foundations that constructing a
larger, more lavish structure.
He undertook great efforts to restore 3000 or so bronze tablets that had been
destroyed from the temple searching for copies throughout the empire.
Other major works included two new temples,
one dedicated to peace and the other to Claudias who had been terrified in order
to restore many neighborhoods, veian enacted a new law,
which allowed anyone to take over a vacant lot previously destroyed by the fire,
provided that they built on it and that the original owner refused to do so.
Of course,
all of these projects pale in comparison to the new Flavian amphitheater,
better known as the Coliseum capable of seating over 50,000 spectators,
it was the largest structure of its kind in the ancient world.
Construction of it began in 72 ad and finished during the reign of Titu with
Domitian later ordering renovations during its time as emperor Verian died on
June the 20 forth, 79 80 at the age of 69,
his demise was something of a mixed bag on the one hands.
He was only the second, em, embryo at that point to die of natural causes.
The first being Augustus with all the others being assassinated or committing
suicide. On the other hand,
he did not have a dignified death S reported that fian fell Lincoln
Pania tracked it. A bowel complaint.
He was stricken with violent attacks of diarrhea that eventually killed him with
his blast breaths.
Sian asked his attendance to hold him up because an emperor ought to die
standing. He was followed onto the throne by his son, Titus,
and then by his other son,
Domitian the Flavian dynasty ended with Dominion's death in 96 ad after only 25
years,
but projects like the Coliseum ensured that Vespas legacy lives on for
millennia. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below,
and don't forget to subscribe and as always, thank you for watching.
I.